---
title: Extensible Prioritization Scheme for HTTP
number: 9218
abbrev: HTTP Priorities
docname: draft-ietf-httpbis-priority-latest
category: std

ipr: trust200902
area: Applications and Real-Time
workgroup: HTTP
keyword:
  - Response priority
  - Stream multiplexing
  - Reprioritization
  - Server scheduling

stand_alone: yes
smart_quotes: no
pi: [toc, docindent, sortrefs, symrefs, strict, compact, comments, inline]

venue:
  group: HTTP
  type: Working Group
  home: https://httpwg.org/
  mail: ietf-http-wg@w3.org
  arch: https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/ietf-http-wg/
  repo: https://github.com/httpwg/http-extensions/labels/priorities
github-issue-label: priorities

author:
  -
    fullname:
      :: 奥 一穂
      ascii: Kazuho Oku
    org: Fastly
    email: kazuhooku@gmail.com
  -
    ins: L. Pardue
    name: Lucas Pardue
    org: Cloudflare
    email: lucaspardue.24.7@gmail.com

normative:

  RFC9110:
    display: HTTP
    title: "HTTP Semantics"
    date: 1970-01-01
    seriesinfo:
      RFC: 9110
      DOI: 10.17487/RFC9110
    author:
      -
          ins: R. Fielding
          name: Roy T. Fielding
          org: Adobe
          role: editor
      -
          ins: M. Nottingham
          name: Mark Nottingham
          org: Fastly
          role: editor
      -
          ins: J. Reschke
          name: Julian Reschke
          org: greenbytes
          role: editor

  RFC9113:
    display: HTTP/2
    title: "HTTP/2"
    date: 1970-01-01
    seriesinfo:
      RFC: 9113
      DOI: 10.17487/RFC9113
    author:
      -
          fullname: Martin Thomson
          org: Mozilla
          role: editor
      -
          fullname: Cory Benfield
          org: Apple Inc.
          role: editor

  RFC9114:
    display: HTTP/3
    title: "HTTP/3"
    date: 1970-01-01
    seriesinfo:
      RFC: 9114
      DOI: 10.17487/RFC9114
    author:
      -
          ins: M. Bishop
          name: Mike Bishop
          org: Akamai
          role: editor

informative:
  RFC9111:
    display: HTTP-CACHING
    title: "HTTP Caching"
    date: 1970-01-01
    seriesinfo:
      RFC: 9111
      DOI: 10.17487/RFC9111
    author:
      -
          ins: R. Fielding
          name: Roy T. Fielding
          org: Adobe
          role: editor
      -
          ins: M. Nottingham
          name: Mark Nottingham
          org: Fastly
          role: editor
      -
          ins: J. Reschke
          name: Julian Reschke
          org: greenbytes
          role: editor

  MARX:
    target: https://www.doi.org/10.5220/0008191701300143
    title: "Of the Utmost Importance: Resource Prioritization in HTTP/3 over QUIC"
    date: 2019-09
    author:
    -
      name: Robin Marx
    -
      name: Tom De Decker
    -
      name: Peter Quax
    -
      name: Wim Lamotte
    seriesinfo:
      DOI: 10.5220/0008191701300143
      SCITEPRESS: "Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Web Information Systems and Technologies (pages 130-143)"


--- abstract

This document describes a scheme that allows an HTTP client to communicate its
preferences for how the upstream server prioritizes responses to its requests,
and also allows a server to hint to a downstream intermediary how its responses
should be prioritized when they are forwarded.  This document defines the
Priority header field for communicating the initial priority in an HTTP
version-independent manner, as well as HTTP/2 and HTTP/3 frames for
reprioritizing responses. These share a common format structure that is designed
to provide future extensibility.

--- middle

# Introduction

It is common for representations of an HTTP {{RFC9110}}
resource to have relationships to one or more other resources. Clients will
often discover these relationships while processing a retrieved representation,
which may lead to further retrieval requests.  Meanwhile, the nature of the
relationships determines whether a client is blocked from continuing to process
locally available resources.  An example of this is the visual rendering of an
HTML document, which could be blocked by the retrieval of a Cascading Style
Sheets (CSS) file that the document refers to. In contrast, inline images do not
block rendering and get drawn incrementally as the chunks of the images arrive.

HTTP/2 {{RFC9113}} and HTTP/3 {{RFC9114}} support multiplexing of requests and
responses in a single connection. An important feature of any implementation of
a protocol that provides multiplexing is the ability to prioritize the sending
of information. For example, to provide meaningful presentation of an HTML
document at the earliest moment, it is important for an HTTP server to
prioritize the HTTP responses, or the chunks of those HTTP responses, that it
sends to a client.

HTTP/2 and HTTP/3 servers can schedule transmission of concurrent response data
by any means they choose. Servers can ignore client priority signals and still
successfully serve HTTP responses. However, servers that operate in ignorance
of how clients issue requests and consume responses can cause suboptimal client
application performance. Priority signals allow clients to communicate their
view of request priority. Servers have their own needs that are independent of
client needs, so they often combine priority signals with other available
information in order to inform scheduling of response data.

RFC 7540 {{?RFC7540}} stream priority allowed a client to send a series of
priority signals that communicate to the server a "priority tree"; the structure
of this tree represents the client's preferred relative ordering and weighted
distribution of the bandwidth among HTTP responses. Servers could use these
priority signals as input into prioritization decisions.

The design and implementation of RFC 7540 stream priority were observed to have
shortcomings, as explained in {{motivation}}. HTTP/2 {{RFC9113}} has
consequently deprecated the use of these stream priority signals. The
prioritization scheme and priority signals defined herein can act as a
substitute for RFC 7540 stream priority.

This document describes an extensible scheme for prioritizing HTTP responses
that uses absolute values. {{parameters}} defines priority parameters, which are
a standardized and extensible format of priority information. {{header-field}}
defines the Priority HTTP header field, which is an end-to-end priority signal
that is independent of protocol version. Clients can send this header field to
signal their view of how responses should be prioritized. Similarly, servers
behind an intermediary can use it to signal priority to the intermediary. After
sending a request, a client can change their view of response priority (see
{{reprioritization}}) by sending HTTP-version-specific frames as defined in
Sections {{<h2-update-frame}} and {{<h3-update-frame}}.

Header field and frame priority signals are input to a server's response
prioritization process. They are only a suggestion and do not guarantee any
particular processing or transmission order for one response relative to any
other response. Sections {{<server-scheduling}} and
{{<retransmission-scheduling}} provide considerations and guidance about how
servers might act upon signals.


## Notational Conventions

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

This document uses the following terminology from {{Section 3 of
!STRUCTURED-FIELDS=RFC8941}} to specify syntax and parsing: Boolean, Dictionary,
and Integer.

Example HTTP requests and responses use the HTTP/2-style formatting from
{{RFC9113}}.

This document uses the variable-length integer encoding from
{{!QUIC=RFC9000}}.

The term "control stream" is used to describe both the HTTP/2 stream with
identifier 0x0 and the HTTP/3 control stream; see {{Section 6.2.1 of RFC9114}}.

The term "HTTP/2 priority signal" is used to describe the priority information
sent from clients to servers in HTTP/2 frames; see {{Section 5.3.2 of RFC9113}}.


# Motivation for Replacing RFC 7540 Stream Priorities {#motivation}

RFC 7540 stream priority (see {{Section 5.3 of ?RFC7540}}) is a complex system
where clients signal stream dependencies and weights to describe an unbalanced
tree. It suffered from limited deployment and interoperability and has been
deprecated in a revision of HTTP/2 {{RFC9113}}. HTTP/2 retains these protocol
elements in order to maintain wire compatibility (see {{Section 5.3.2 of
RFC9113}}), which means that they might still be used even in the presence of
alternative signaling, such as the scheme this document describes.

Many RFC 7540 server implementations do not act on HTTP/2 priority
signals.

Prioritization can use information that servers have about resources or
the order in which requests are generated. For example, a server, with knowledge
of an HTML document structure, might want to prioritize the delivery of images
that are critical to user experience above other images.  With RFC 7540, it is
difficult for servers to interpret signals from clients for prioritization, as
the same conditions could result in very different signaling from different
clients. This document describes signaling that is simpler and more constrained,
requiring less interpretation and allowing less variation.

RFC 7540 does not define a method that can be used by a server to provide a
priority signal for intermediaries.

RFC 7540 stream priority is expressed relative to other requests sharing the
same connection at the same time. It is difficult to incorporate such a design
into applications that generate requests without knowledge of how other requests
might share a connection, or into protocols that do not have strong ordering
guarantees across streams, like HTTP/3 {{RFC9114}}.

Experiments from independent research {{MARX}} have shown
that simpler schemes can reach at least equivalent performance characteristics
compared to the more complex RFC 7540 setups seen in practice, at least for the
Web use case.

## Disabling RFC 7540 Stream Priorities {#disabling}

The problems and insights set out above provided the motivation for an
alternative to RFC 7540 stream priority (see {{Section 5.3 of RFC9113}}).

The SETTINGS_NO_RFC7540_PRIORITIES HTTP/2 setting is defined by this document in
order to allow endpoints to omit or ignore HTTP/2 priority signals (see
{{Section 5.3.2 of RFC9113}}), as described below. The value of
SETTINGS_NO_RFC7540_PRIORITIES MUST be 0 or 1. Any value other than 0 or 1 MUST
be treated as a connection error (see {{Section 5.4.1 of RFC9113}}) of type
PROTOCOL_ERROR. The initial value is 0.

If endpoints use SETTINGS_NO_RFC7540_PRIORITIES, they MUST send it in the first
SETTINGS frame. Senders MUST NOT change the SETTINGS_NO_RFC7540_PRIORITIES value
after the first SETTINGS frame. Receivers that detect a change MAY treat it as a
connection error of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.

Clients can send SETTINGS_NO_RFC7540_PRIORITIES with a value of 1 to indicate
that they are not using HTTP/2 priority signals. The SETTINGS frame precedes any
HTTP/2 priority signal sent from clients, so servers can determine whether they
need to allocate any resources to signal handling before signals arrive. A
server that receives SETTINGS_NO_RFC7540_PRIORITIES with a value of 1 MUST
ignore HTTP/2 priority signals.

Servers can send SETTINGS_NO_RFC7540_PRIORITIES with a value of 1 to indicate
that they will ignore HTTP/2 priority signals sent by clients.

Endpoints that send SETTINGS_NO_RFC7540_PRIORITIES are encouraged to use
alternative priority signals (for example, see {{header-field}} or
{{h2-update-frame}}) but there is no requirement to use a specific signal type.

### Advice when Using Extensible Priorities as the Alternative

Before receiving a SETTINGS frame from a server, a client does not know if the server
is ignoring HTTP/2 priority signals. Therefore, until the client receives the
SETTINGS frame from the server, the client SHOULD send both the HTTP/2
priority signals and the signals of this prioritization scheme (see Sections
{{<header-field}} and {{<h2-update-frame}}).

Once the client receives the first SETTINGS frame that contains the
SETTINGS_NO_RFC7540_PRIORITIES parameter with a value of 1, it SHOULD stop
sending the HTTP/2 priority signals. This avoids sending redundant signals that
are known to be ignored.

Similarly, if the client receives SETTINGS_NO_RFC7540_PRIORITIES with value of 0
or if the settings parameter was absent, it SHOULD stop sending PRIORITY_UPDATE
frames ({{h2-update-frame}}), since those frames are likely to be ignored.
However, the client MAY continue sending the Priority header field
({{header-field}}), as it is an end-to-end signal that might be useful to nodes
behind the server that the client is directly connected to.


# Applicability of the Extensible Priority Scheme

The priority scheme defined by this document is primarily focused on the
prioritization of HTTP response messages (see {{Section 3.4 of RFC9110}}). It
defines new priority parameters ({{parameters}}) and a means of conveying those
parameters (Sections {{<header-field}} and {{<frame}}), which is intended to communicate
the priority of responses to a server that is responsible for prioritizing
them. {{server-scheduling}} provides considerations for servers about acting on
those signals in combination with other inputs and factors.

The CONNECT method (see {{Section 9.3.6 of RFC9110}}) can be used to establish
tunnels. Signaling applies similarly to tunnels; additional considerations for
server prioritization are given in {{connect-scheduling}}.

{{client-scheduling}} describes how clients can optionally apply elements of
this scheme locally to the request messages that they generate.

Some forms of HTTP extensions might change HTTP/2 or HTTP/3 stream behavior or
define new data carriage mechanisms. Such extensions can themselves define how
this priority scheme is to be applied.


# Priority Parameters {#parameters}

The priority information is a sequence of key-value pairs, providing room for
future extensions. Each key-value pair represents a priority parameter.

The Priority HTTP header field ({{header-field}}) is an end-to-end way to
transmit this set of priority parameters when a request or a response is issued.
After sending a request, a client can change their view of response priority
({{reprioritization}}) by sending HTTP-version-specific PRIORITY_UPDATE frames
defined in Sections {{<h2-update-frame}} and {{<h3-update-frame}}. Frames
transmit priority parameters on a single hop only.

Intermediaries can consume and produce priority signals in a PRIORITY_UPDATE
frame or Priority header field. An intermediary that passes only the Priority
request header field to the next hop preserves the original end-to-end signal
from the client; see {{header-field-rationale}}. An intermediary could pass the
Priority header field and additionally send a PRIORITY_UPDATE frame. This would
have the effect of preserving the original client end-to-end signal, while
instructing the next hop to use a different priority; per the guidance in
{{frame}}. An intermediary that replaces or adds a Priority request header field
overrides the original client end-to-end signal, which can affect prioritization
for all subsequent recipients of the request.

For both the Priority header field and the PRIORITY_UPDATE frame, the set of
priority parameters is encoded as a Dictionary (see {{Section 3.2 of
STRUCTURED-FIELDS}}).

This document defines the urgency (`u`) and incremental (`i`) priority
parameters. When receiving an HTTP request that does not carry these priority
parameters, a server SHOULD act as if their default values were specified.

An intermediary can combine signals from requests and responses that it forwards.
Note that omission of priority parameters in responses is handled differently from
omission in requests; see {{merging}}.

Receivers parse the Dictionary as described in {{Section 4.2 of
STRUCTURED-FIELDS}}. Where the Dictionary is successfully parsed, this document
places the additional requirement that unknown priority parameters, priority
parameters with out-of-range values, or values of unexpected types MUST be
ignored.

## Urgency

The urgency (`u`) parameter value is Integer (see {{Section 3.3.1 of
STRUCTURED-FIELDS}}), between 0 and 7 inclusive, in descending order of
priority. The default is 3.

Endpoints use this parameter to communicate their view of the precedence of
HTTP responses. The chosen value of urgency can be based on the expectation that
servers might use this information to transmit HTTP responses in the order of
their urgency. The smaller the value, the higher the precedence.

The following example shows a request for a CSS file with the urgency set to
`0`:

~~~
:method = GET
:scheme = https
:authority = example.net
:path = /style.css
priority = u=0
~~~

A client that fetches a document that likely consists of multiple HTTP resources
(e.g., HTML) SHOULD assign the default urgency level to the main resource.  This
convention allows servers to refine the urgency using
knowledge specific to the website (see {{merging}}).

The lowest urgency level (7) is reserved for background tasks such as delivery
of software updates. This urgency level SHOULD NOT be used for fetching
responses that have any impact on user interaction.

## Incremental

The incremental (`i`) parameter value is Boolean (see {{Section 3.3.6 of
STRUCTURED-FIELDS}}). It indicates if an HTTP response can be processed
incrementally, i.e., provide some meaningful output as chunks of the response
arrive.

The default value of the incremental parameter is `false` (`0`).

If a client makes concurrent requests with the incremental parameter set to
`false`, there is no benefit in serving responses with the same urgency concurrently
because the client is not going to process those responses incrementally.
Serving non-incremental responses with the same urgency one by one, in the order
in which those requests were generated, is considered to be the best strategy.

If a client makes concurrent requests with the incremental parameter set to
`true`, serving requests with the same urgency concurrently might be beneficial.
Doing this distributes the connection bandwidth, meaning that responses take
longer to complete. Incremental delivery is most useful where multiple
partial responses might provide some value to clients ahead of a
complete response being available.

The following example shows a request for a JPEG file with the urgency parameter
set to `5` and the incremental parameter set to `true`.

~~~
:method = GET
:scheme = https
:authority = example.net
:path = /image.jpg
priority = u=5, i
~~~

## Defining New Priority Parameters {#new-parameters}

When attempting to define new priority parameters, care must be taken so that
they do not adversely interfere with prioritization performed by existing
endpoints or intermediaries that do not understand the newly defined priority
parameters. Since unknown priority parameters are ignored, new priority
parameters should not change the interpretation of, or modify, the urgency (see
{{urgency}}) or incremental (see {{incremental}}) priority parameters in a way
that is not backwards compatible or fallback safe.

For example, if there is a need to provide more granularity than eight urgency
levels, it would be possible to subdivide the range using an additional priority
parameter. Implementations that do not recognize the parameter can safely
continue to use the less granular eight levels.

Alternatively, the urgency can be augmented. For example, a graphical user agent
could send a `visible` priority parameter to indicate if the resource being requested is
within the viewport.

Generic priority parameters are preferred over vendor-specific,
application-specific, or deployment-specific values. If a generic value cannot
be agreed upon in the community, the parameter's name should be correspondingly
specific (e.g., with a prefix that identifies the vendor, application, or
deployment).

### Registration {#register}

New priority parameters can be defined by registering them in the "HTTP
Priority" registry. This registry governs the keys (short textual strings) used
in the Dictionary (see {{Section 3.2 of STRUCTURED-FIELDS}}). Since each HTTP
request can have associated priority signals, there is value in having short key
lengths, especially single-character strings. In order to encourage extensions
while avoiding unintended conflict among attractive key values, the "HTTP
Priority" registry operates two registration policies, depending on key length.

* Registration requests for priority parameters with a key length of one use the
Specification Required policy, per {{Section 4.6 of !RFC8126}}.

* Registration requests for priority parameters with a key length greater than
one use the Expert Review policy, per {{Section 4.5 of !RFC8126}}. A
specification document is appreciated but not required.

When reviewing registration requests, the designated expert(s) can consider the
additional guidance provided in {{new-parameters}} but cannot use it as a basis
for rejection.

Registration requests should use the following template:

Name:
: \[a name for the priority parameter that matches the parameter key\]

Description:
: \[a description of the priority parameter semantics and value\]

Reference:
: \[to a specification defining this priority parameter\]

See the registry at [](https://iana.org/assignments/http-priority/){:
brackets="angle"} for details on
where to send registration requests.

# The Priority HTTP Header Field {#header-field}

The Priority HTTP header field is a Dictionary that carries priority parameters
(see {{parameters}}). It can appear in requests and responses. It is an
end-to-end signal that indicates the endpoint's view of how HTTP responses
should be prioritized. {{merging}} describes how intermediaries can combine the
priority information sent from clients and servers. Clients cannot interpret the
appearance or omission of a Priority response header field as acknowledgement
that any prioritization has occurred. Guidance for how endpoints can act on
Priority header values is given in Sections {{<client-scheduling}} and
{{<server-scheduling}}.

An HTTP request with a Priority header field might be cached and reused for
subsequent requests; see {{RFC9111}}. When an origin server generates the
Priority response header field based on properties of an HTTP request it
receives, the server is expected to control the cacheability or the
applicability of the cached response by using header fields that control the
caching behavior (e.g., Cache-Control, Vary).


# Reprioritization

After a client sends a request, it may be beneficial to change the priority of
the response. As an example, a web browser might issue a prefetch request for a
JavaScript file with the urgency parameter of the Priority request header field
set to `u=7` (background). Then, when the user navigates to a page that
references the new JavaScript file, while the prefetch is in progress, the
browser would send a reprioritization signal with the Priority Field Value set
to `u=0`. The PRIORITY_UPDATE frame ({{frame}}) can be used for such
reprioritization.


# The PRIORITY_UPDATE Frame {#frame}

This document specifies a new PRIORITY_UPDATE frame for HTTP/2 {{RFC9113}}
and HTTP/3 {{RFC9114}}. It carries priority parameters and
references the target of the prioritization based on a version-specific
identifier. In HTTP/2, this identifier is the stream ID; in HTTP/3, the
identifier is either the stream ID or push ID. Unlike the Priority header field,
the PRIORITY_UPDATE frame is a hop-by-hop signal.

PRIORITY_UPDATE frames are sent by clients on the control stream, allowing them
to be sent independently of the stream that carries the response. This means
they can be used to reprioritize a response or a push stream, or to signal the
initial priority of a response instead of the Priority header field.

A PRIORITY_UPDATE frame communicates a complete set of all priority parameters
in the Priority Field Value field. Omitting a priority parameter is a signal to
use its default value. Failure to parse the Priority Field Value MAY be treated
as a connection error. In HTTP/2, the error is of type PROTOCOL_ERROR; in
HTTP/3, the error is of type H3_GENERAL_PROTOCOL_ERROR.

A client MAY send a PRIORITY_UPDATE frame before the stream that it references
is open (except for HTTP/2 push streams; see {{h2-update-frame}}). Furthermore,
HTTP/3 offers no guaranteed ordering across streams, which could cause the frame
to be received earlier than intended. Either case leads to a race condition
where a server receives a PRIORITY_UPDATE frame that references a request stream
that is yet to be opened. To solve this condition, for the purposes of
scheduling, the most recently received PRIORITY_UPDATE frame can be considered
as the most up-to-date information that overrides any other signal. Servers
SHOULD buffer the most recently received PRIORITY_UPDATE frame and apply it once
the referenced stream is opened. Holding PRIORITY_UPDATE frames for each stream
requires server resources, which can be bounded by local implementation policy.
Although there is no limit to the number of PRIORITY_UPDATE frames that can be
sent, storing only the most recently received frame limits resource commitment.

## HTTP/2 PRIORITY_UPDATE Frame {#h2-update-frame}

The HTTP/2 PRIORITY_UPDATE frame (type=0x10) is used by clients to signal the
initial priority of a response, or to reprioritize a response or push stream. It
carries the stream ID of the response and the priority in ASCII text, using the
same representation as the Priority header field value.

The Stream Identifier field (see {{Section 5.1.1 of RFC9113}}) in the
PRIORITY_UPDATE frame header MUST be zero (0x0). Receiving a PRIORITY_UPDATE
frame with a field of any other value MUST be treated as a connection error of
type PROTOCOL_ERROR.

~~~
HTTP/2 PRIORITY_UPDATE Frame {
  Length (24),
  Type (8) = 0x10,

  Unused Flags (8),

  Reserved (1),
  Stream Identifier (31),

  Reserved (1),
  Prioritized Stream ID (31),
  Priority Field Value (..),
}
~~~
{: #fig-h2-reprioritization-frame title="HTTP/2 PRIORITY_UPDATE Frame Format"}

The Length, Type, Unused Flag(s), Reserved, and Stream Identifier fields are
described in {{Section 4 of RFC9113}}. The PRIORITY_UPDATE frame payload
contains the following additional fields:

Prioritized Stream ID:
: A 31-bit stream identifier for the stream that is the target of the priority
  update.

Priority Field Value:
: The priority update value in ASCII text, encoded using Structured Fields. This
  is the same representation as the Priority header field value.

When the PRIORITY_UPDATE frame applies to a request stream, clients SHOULD
provide a prioritized stream ID that refers to a stream in the "open",
"half-closed (local)", or "idle" state (i.e., streams where data might still be
received). Servers can discard frames where the prioritized stream ID refers to
a stream in the "half-closed (local)" or "closed" state (i.e., streams where no
further data will be sent). The number of streams that have been prioritized but
remain in the "idle" state plus the number of active streams (those in the
"open" state or in either of the "half-closed" states; see {{Section 5.1.2 of
RFC9113}}) MUST NOT exceed the value of the SETTINGS_MAX_CONCURRENT_STREAMS
parameter. Servers that receive such a PRIORITY_UPDATE MUST respond with a
connection error of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.

When the PRIORITY_UPDATE frame applies to a push stream, clients SHOULD provide
a prioritized stream ID that refers to a stream in the "reserved (remote)" or
"half-closed (local)" state. Servers can discard frames where the prioritized
stream ID refers to a stream in the "closed" state. Clients MUST NOT provide a
prioritized stream ID that refers to a push stream in the "idle" state. Servers
that receive a PRIORITY_UPDATE for a push stream in the "idle" state MUST
respond with a connection error of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.

If a PRIORITY_UPDATE frame is received with a prioritized stream ID of 0x0, the
recipient MUST respond with a connection error of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.

Servers MUST NOT send PRIORITY_UPDATE frames. If a client receives a
PRIORITY_UPDATE frame, it MUST respond with a connection error of type
PROTOCOL_ERROR.

## HTTP/3 PRIORITY_UPDATE Frame {#h3-update-frame}

The HTTP/3 PRIORITY_UPDATE frame (type=0xF0700 or 0xF0701) is used by clients to
signal the initial priority of a response, or to reprioritize a response or push
stream. It carries the identifier of the element that is being prioritized and
the updated priority in ASCII text that uses the same representation as that of
the Priority header field value. PRIORITY_UPDATE with a frame type of 0xF0700 is
used for request streams, while PRIORITY_UPDATE with a frame type of 0xF0701 is
used for push streams.

The PRIORITY_UPDATE frame MUST be sent on the client control stream
(see {{Section 6.2.1 of RFC9114}}). Receiving a PRIORITY_UPDATE frame on a
stream other than the client control stream MUST be treated as a connection
error of type H3_FRAME_UNEXPECTED.

~~~
HTTP/3 PRIORITY_UPDATE Frame {
  Type (i) = 0xF0700..0xF0701,
  Length (i),
  Prioritized Element ID (i),
  Priority Field Value (..),
}
~~~
{: #fig-h3-reprioritization-frame title="HTTP/3 PRIORITY_UPDATE Frame"}

The PRIORITY_UPDATE frame payload has the following fields:

Prioritized Element ID:
: The stream ID or push ID that is the target of the priority update.

Priority Field Value:
: The priority update value in ASCII text, encoded using Structured Fields. This
  is the same representation as the Priority header field value.

The request-stream variant of PRIORITY_UPDATE (type=0xF0700) MUST reference a
request stream. If a server receives a PRIORITY_UPDATE (type=0xF0700) for a
stream ID that is not a request stream, this MUST be treated as a connection
error of type H3_ID_ERROR. The stream ID MUST be within the client-initiated
bidirectional stream limit. If a server receives a PRIORITY_UPDATE
(type=0xF0700) with a stream ID that is beyond the stream limits, this SHOULD be
treated as a connection error of type H3_ID_ERROR. Generating an error is not
mandatory because HTTP/3 implementations might have practical barriers to
determining the active stream concurrency limit that is applied by the QUIC
layer.

The push-stream variant of PRIORITY_UPDATE (type=0xF0701) MUST reference a
promised push stream. If a server receives a PRIORITY_UPDATE (type=0xF0701) with
a push ID that is greater than the maximum push ID or that has not yet been
promised, this MUST be treated as a connection error of type H3_ID_ERROR.

Servers MUST NOT send PRIORITY_UPDATE frames of either type. If a client
receives a PRIORITY_UPDATE frame, this MUST be treated as a connection error of
type H3_FRAME_UNEXPECTED.


# Merging Client- and Server-Driven Priority Parameters {#merging}

It is not always the case that the client has the best understanding of how the
HTTP responses deserve to be prioritized. The server might have additional
information that can be combined with the client's indicated priority in order
to improve the prioritization of the response. For example, use of an HTML
document might depend heavily on one of the inline images; the existence of such
dependencies is typically best known to the server. Or, a server that receives
requests for a font {{?RFC8081}} and images with the same urgency might give
higher precedence to the font, so that a visual client can render textual
information at an early moment.

An origin can use the Priority response header field to indicate its view on how
an HTTP response should be prioritized. An intermediary that forwards an HTTP
response can use the priority parameters found in the Priority response header
field, in combination with the client Priority request header field, as input to
its prioritization process. No guidance is provided for merging priorities; this
is left as an implementation decision.

The absence of a priority parameter in an HTTP response indicates the server's
disinterest in changing the client-provided value. This is different from the
request header field, in which omission of a priority parameter implies the use
of its default value (see {{parameters}}).

As a non-normative example, when the client sends an HTTP request with the
urgency parameter set to `5` and the incremental parameter set to `true`

~~~
:method = GET
:scheme = https
:authority = example.net
:path = /menu.png
priority = u=5, i
~~~

and the origin responds with

~~~
:status = 200
content-type = image/png
priority = u=1
~~~

the intermediary might alter its understanding of the urgency from `5` to `1`,
because it prefers the server-provided value over the client's. The incremental
value continues to be `true`, i.e., the value specified by the client, as the
server did not specify the incremental (`i`) parameter.


# Client Scheduling

A client MAY use priority values to make local processing or scheduling choices
about the requests it initiates.


# Server Scheduling

It is generally beneficial for an HTTP server to send all responses as early as
possible. However, when serving multiple requests on a single connection, there
could be competition between the requests for resources such as connection
bandwidth. This section describes considerations regarding how servers can
schedule the order in which the competing responses will be sent when such
competition exists.

Server scheduling is a prioritization process based on many inputs, with
priority signals being only one form of input. Factors such as implementation
choices or deployment environment also play a role. Any given connection is
likely to have many dynamic permutations. For these reasons, it is not possible
to describe a universal scheduling algorithm. This document provides some basic,
non-exhaustive recommendations for how servers might act on priority
parameters. It does not describe in detail how servers might combine priority
signals with other factors. Endpoints cannot depend on particular treatment
based on priority signals. Expressing priority is only a suggestion.

It is RECOMMENDED that, when possible, servers respect the urgency parameter
({{urgency}}), sending higher-urgency responses before lower-urgency responses.

The incremental parameter indicates how a client processes response bytes as
they arrive. It is RECOMMENDED that, when possible, servers respect the
incremental parameter ({{incremental}}).

Non-incremental responses of the same urgency SHOULD be served by prioritizing
bandwidth allocation in ascending order of the stream ID, which corresponds to
the order in which clients make requests. Doing so ensures that clients can use
request ordering to influence response order.

Incremental responses of the same urgency SHOULD be served by sharing bandwidth
among them. The message content of incremental responses is used as parts, or
chunks, are received. A client might benefit more from receiving a portion of
all these resources rather than the entirety of a single resource. How large a
portion of the resource is needed to be useful in improving performance varies.
Some resource types place critical elements early; others can use information
progressively. This scheme provides no explicit mandate about how a server
should use size, type, or any other input to decide how to prioritize.

There can be scenarios where a server will need to schedule multiple incremental
and non-incremental responses at the same urgency level. Strictly abiding the
scheduling guidance based on urgency and request generation order might lead
to suboptimal results at the client, as early non-incremental responses might
prevent serving of incremental responses issued later. The following are
examples of such challenges:

1. At the same urgency level, a non-incremental request for a large resource
   followed by an incremental request for a small resource.
2. At the same urgency level, an incremental request of indeterminate length
   followed by a non-incremental large resource.

It is RECOMMENDED that servers avoid such starvation where possible. The method
for doing so is an implementation decision. For example, a server might
preemptively send responses of a particular incremental type based on other
information such as content size.

Optimal scheduling of server push is difficult, especially when pushed resources
contend with active concurrent requests. Servers can consider many factors when
scheduling, such as the type or size of resource being pushed, the priority of
the request that triggered the push, the count of active concurrent responses,
the priority of other active concurrent responses, etc. There is no general
guidance on the best way to apply these. A server that is too simple could
easily push at too high a priority and block client requests, or push at too low
a priority and delay the response, negating intended goals of server push.

Priority signals are a factor for server push scheduling. The concept of
parameter value defaults applies slightly differently because there is no
explicit client-signaled initial priority. A server can apply priority signals
provided in an origin response; see the merging guidance given in {{merging}}.
In the absence of origin signals, applying default parameter values could be
suboptimal. By whatever means a server decides to schedule a pushed response, it
can signal the intended priority to the client by including the Priority field
in a PUSH_PROMISE or HEADERS frame.

## Intermediaries with Multiple Backend Connections

An intermediary serving an HTTP connection might split requests over multiple
backend connections. When it applies prioritization rules strictly, low-priority
requests cannot make progress while requests with higher priorities are in
flight. This blocking can propagate to backend connections, which the peer might
interpret as a connection stall. Endpoints often implement protections against
stalls, such as abruptly closing connections after a certain time period. To
reduce the possibility of this occurring, intermediaries can avoid strictly
following prioritization and instead allocate small amounts of bandwidth for all
the requests that they are forwarding, so that every request can make some
progress over time.

Similarly, servers SHOULD allocate some amount of bandwidths to streams acting
as tunnels.


# Scheduling and the CONNECT Method {#connect-scheduling}

When a stream carries a CONNECT request, the scheduling guidance in this
document applies to the frames on the stream. A client that issues multiple
CONNECT requests can set the incremental parameter to `true`. Servers that
implement the recommendations for handling of the incremental parameter in
{{server-scheduling}} are likely to schedule these fairly, preventing one
CONNECT stream from blocking others.


# Retransmission Scheduling

Transport protocols such as TCP and QUIC provide reliability by detecting packet
losses and retransmitting lost information. In addition to the considerations in
{{server-scheduling}}, scheduling of retransmission data could compete with new
data. The remainder of this section discusses considerations when using QUIC.

{{Section 13.3 of QUIC}} states the following: "Endpoints SHOULD prioritize
retransmission of data over sending new data, unless priorities specified by the
application indicate otherwise". When an HTTP/3 application uses the priority
scheme defined in this document and the QUIC transport implementation supports
application-indicated stream priority, a transport that considers the relative
priority of streams when scheduling both new data and retransmission data might
better match the expectations of the application. However, there are no
requirements on how a transport chooses to schedule based on this information
because the decision depends on several factors and trade-offs. It could
prioritize new data for a higher-urgency stream over retransmission data for a
lower-priority stream, or it could prioritize retransmission data over new data
irrespective of urgencies.

{{Section 6.2.4 of ?QUIC-RECOVERY=RFC9002}} also highlights considerations
regarding application priorities when sending probe packets after Probe Timeout
timer expiration. A QUIC implementation supporting application-indicated
priorities might use the relative priority of streams when choosing probe data.


# Fairness {#fairness}

Typically, HTTP implementations depend on the underlying transport to maintain
fairness between connections competing for bandwidth. When an intermediary
receives HTTP requests on client connections, it forwards them to backend
connections. Depending on how the
intermediary coalesces or splits requests across different backend connections,
different clients might experience dissimilar performance. This dissimilarity
might expand if the intermediary also uses priority signals when
forwarding requests. Sections {{<coalescing}} and {{<h1-backends}} discuss
mitigations against this expansion of unfairness.

Conversely, {{intentional-unfairness}} discusses how servers might intentionally
allocate unequal bandwidth to some connections, depending on the priority
signals.

## Coalescing Intermediaries {#coalescing}

When an intermediary coalesces HTTP requests coming from multiple clients into
one HTTP/2 or HTTP/3 connection going to the backend server, requests that
originate from one client might carry signals indicating higher priority than
those coming from others.

It is sometimes beneficial for the server running behind an intermediary to obey
Priority header field values. As an example, a resource-constrained server might
defer the transmission of software update files that have the background urgency
level (7). However, in the worst case, the asymmetry between the priority
declared by multiple clients might cause all responses going to one user agent
to be delayed until all responses going to another user agent have been sent.

In order to mitigate this fairness problem, a server could use knowledge about
the intermediary as another input in its prioritization decisions. For
instance, if a server knows the intermediary is coalescing requests, then it
could avoid serving the responses in their entirety and instead distribute
bandwidth (for example, in a round-robin manner). This can work if the
constrained resource is network capacity between the intermediary and the user
agent, as the intermediary buffers responses and forwards the chunks based on
the prioritization scheme it implements.

A server can determine if a request came from an intermediary through
configuration or can check to see if the request contains one of the following
header fields:

* Forwarded {{?FORWARDED=RFC7239}}, X-Forwarded-For
* Via (see {{Section 7.6.3 of RFC9110}})

## HTTP/1.x Back Ends {#h1-backends}

It is common for Content Delivery Network (CDN) infrastructure to support
different HTTP versions on the front end and back end. For instance, the
client-facing edge might support HTTP/2 and HTTP/3 while communication to
backend servers is done using HTTP/1.1. Unlike connection coalescing, the CDN
will "demux" requests into discrete connections to the back end. Response
multiplexing in a single connection is not supported by HTTP/1.1 (or older), so
there is not a fairness problem. However, backend servers MAY still use client
headers for request scheduling. Backend servers SHOULD only schedule based on
client priority information where that information can be scoped to individual
end clients. Authentication and other session information might provide this
linkability.

## Intentional Introduction of Unfairness {#intentional-unfairness}

It is sometimes beneficial to deprioritize the transmission of one connection
over others, knowing that doing so introduces a certain amount of unfairness
between the connections and therefore between the requests served on those
connections.

For example, a server might use a scavenging congestion controller on
connections that only convey background priority responses such as software
update images. Doing so improves responsiveness of other connections at the cost
of delaying the delivery of updates.

# Why Use an End-to-End Header Field? {#header-field-rationale}

In contrast to the prioritization scheme of HTTP/2, which uses a hop-by-hop
frame, the Priority header field is defined as "end-to-end".

The way that a client processes a response is a property associated with the
client generating that request, not that of an intermediary.  Therefore, it is
an end-to-end property.  How these end-to-end properties carried by the Priority
header field affect the prioritization between the responses that share a
connection is a hop-by-hop issue.

Having the Priority header field defined as end-to-end is important for caching
intermediaries.  Such intermediaries can cache the value of the Priority header
field along with the response and utilize the value of the cached header field
when serving the cached response, only because the header field is defined as
end-to-end rather than hop-by-hop.

# Security Considerations

{{frame}} describes considerations for server buffering of PRIORITY_UPDATE
frames.

{{server-scheduling}} presents examples where servers that prioritize responses
in a certain way might be starved of the ability to transmit responses.

The security considerations from {{STRUCTURED-FIELDS}} apply to the processing
of priority parameters defined in {{parameters}}.

# IANA Considerations

This specification registers the following entry in the "Hypertext Transfer
Protocol (HTTP) Field Name Registry" defined in {{RFC9110}}:

Field Name:
: Priority

Status:
: permanent

Reference:
: This document


This specification registers the following entry in the "HTTP/2 Settings"
registry defined in {{RFC9113}}:

Code:
: 0x9

Name:
: SETTINGS_NO_RFC7540_PRIORITIES

Initial Value:
: 0

Reference:
: This document

This specification registers the following entry in the "HTTP/2 Frame Type"
registry defined in {{RFC9113}}:

Code:
: 0x10

Frame Type:
: PRIORITY_UPDATE

Reference:
: This document

This specification registers the following entry in the "HTTP/3 Frame Types"
registry established by {{RFC9114}}:

Value:
: 0xF0700-0xF0701

Frame Type:
: PRIORITY_UPDATE

Status:
: permanent

Reference:
: This document

Change Controller:
: IETF

Contact:
: ietf-http-wg@w3.org

IANA has created the "Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) Priority" registry at
[](https://iana.org/assignments/http-priority/){: brackets="angle"} and has
populated it with the entries in {{iana-parameter-table}}; see {{register}} for
its associated procedures.

| ----- | --------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------- |
| Name  | Description                                               | Reference        |
| ----- | :-------------------------------------------------------: | ---------------- |
| u     | The urgency of an HTTP response.                          | {{urgency}}      |
| i     | Whether an HTTP response can be processed incrementally.  | {{incremental}}  |
| ----- | --------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------- |
{: #iana-parameter-table title="Initial Priority Parameters"}

--- back

# Acknowledgements

<t><contact fullname="Roy Fielding"/> presented the idea of using a header field
for representing priorities in <eref
target="https://www.ietf.org/proceedings/83/slides/slides-83-httpbis-5.pdf"
brackets="angle" />. In <eref
target="https://github.com/pmeenan/http3-prioritization-proposal"
brackets="angle" />, Patrick Meenan advocated for representing the priorities
using a tuple of urgency and concurrency. The ability to disable HTTP/2
prioritization is inspired by {{?I-D.lassey-priority-setting}}, authored by Brad
Lassey and Lucas Pardue, with modifications based on feedback that was not
incorporated into an update to that document.</t>

<t>The motivation for defining an alternative to HTTP/2 priorities is drawn from
discussion within the broad HTTP community. Special thanks to
<contact fullname="Roberto Peon"/>,  <contact fullname="Martin Thomson"/>,
and Netflix for text that was incorporated explicitly in this document.</t>

<t>In addition to the people above, this document owes a lot to the extensive
discussion in the HTTP priority design team, consisting of
<contact fullname="Alan Frindell"/>, <contact fullname="Andrew Galloni"/>,
<contact fullname="Craig Taylor"/>, <contact fullname="Ian Swett"/>,
<contact fullname="Matthew Cox"/>, <contact fullname="Mike Bishop"/>,
<contact fullname="Roberto Peon"/>, <contact fullname="Robin Marx"/>,
<contact fullname="Roy Fielding"/>, and the authors of this document.</t>

<t><contact fullname="Yang Chi"/> contributed the section on retransmission
scheduling.</t>

