# Shepherd Writeup for draft-ietf-httpbis-legally-restricted-status

## 1. Summary

Mark Nottingham is the document shepherd; Barry Leiba is the responsible Area Director.

This document specifies a Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) status code for use when resource access is denied as a consequence of legal demands.

Its requested publication type is Proposed Standard, as HTTP status codes require IETF Review.


## 2. Review and Consensus

This document started as an individual draft, which the WG discussed and initially decided to "hold". The primary reason for this was that it wasn't clear if there were use cases that would benefit from a status code (as opposed to just using the body of the response), and whether there was interest in deployment.

Over time, this was clarified; both Web sites and consuming software demonstrated interest. Importantly, we heard that having an indicator that an automated client could easily detect would help users like Lumen <https://lumendatabase.org> (formerly, Chilling Effects).

As a result (and after discussion both on list and in meetings), we decided to adopt the draft.

Technical discussion involved a broad selection of the Working Group. There was some back and forth about what the right scope for the status code's semantics should be (as well as whether we needed more than one), but we were able to achieve consensus on the current document.

451 has already been adopted by some sites on the Web, and based upon discussions (mostly private), it appears that a significantly larger number will adopt it once it becomes standard. On the client side, interest has been expressed by Lumen, Article19, CDT and others.


## 3. Intellectual Property

The author has stated that their direct, personal knowledge of any IPR related to this document has already been disclosed, in conformance with BCPs 78 and 79.

## 4. Other Points

Note any downward references (see RFC 3967) and whether they appear in the DOWNREF Registry (http://trac.tools.ietf.org/group/iesg/trac/wiki/DownrefRegistry), as these need to be announced during Last Call.

## Checklist

* Have all references within this document been identified as either normative or informative, and does the shepherd agree with how they have been classified?
