# Shepherd Writeup for RFC5987bis

## 1. Summary

Mark Nottingham is the Document Shepherd. The responsible AD is Alexey Melnikov.

By default, header field values in Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) messages cannot easily carry
characters outside the US-ASCII coded character set. RFC 2231 defines an encoding mechanism for use
in parameters inside Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) header field values. This
document specifies an encoding suitable for use in HTTP header fields that is compatible with a
simplified profile of the encoding defined in RFC 2231.

Explain briefly what the intent of the document is (the document's abstract is usually good for this), and why the working group has chosen the requested publication type (BCP, Proposed Standard, Internet Standard, Informational, Experimental, or Historic).

## 2. Review and Consensus

Explain how actively the document was reviewed and discussed, by the working group and external parties, and explain in a general sense how much of the interested community is behind the document. Explain anything notable about the discussion of the document.

(In this section, tell the IESG whether there was review by a small number of interested folks within the working group, a lively long term discussion by large numbers of working group participants, and whether there was quick and broad consensus or several issues for which the consensus was "rough". Cite significant points of difficulty or controversy, and explain how they were resolved. Mention any reviews done by directorates, review teams, expert reviews, reviews from other SDOs, and whether there you think other specific groups should do further review. Consider, for example, reviews from the perspective of security, operational complexity, AAA, DNS, DHCP, XML, or internationalization. You should also describe any specific concerns or issues that the document shepherd has with this document or with the working group process related to it that the responsible Area Director and/or the IESG should be aware of. Note known implementation plans or any current implementations. If there are no plans for implementation, explain why this document is valuable in spite of that.)

## 3. Intellectual Property

The author has confirmed that to their direct, personal knowlege, all IPR related to this document has already been disclosed.


## 4. Other Points

* Is the correct RFC type indicated in the title page header?
* Is the abstract both brief and sufficient, and does it stand alone as a brief summary?

